When I met Angel, I was 14.
When I turned 15, he came to my
house to ask for permission
to be with me, and my mom
said a definite no.
After I turned 16 and I decided
to marry him, I wanted
to be with him for a lot
of different reasons.
To start, I thought I was
expected to marry him because
I was intimate with
him before, right?
So in our culture, it just
doesn't seem right to be with
somebody and then end the
relationship or something.
It's something to last and
forever to keep, right?
Has Daddy ever hit you
in the stomach
when you were pregnant?
Why do you want to know that?
How did you feel?
Because.
How did I feel?
Well, I felt hurt and angry.
And I felt double guilt because
I was allowing him to
hurt me and I was allowing him
to injure the pregnancy.
If I ever did say, you know,
I'm pregnant, like just
please, right?
He said, well, why do I care?
That baby's probably
not even mine.
And it was like this, not
only with my first son.
It was like this throughout my
three other pregnancies.
Did you ever feel scared?
It was something that
was uncertain.
I didn't know when.
We would have problems. It was
very often so it really didn't
give me a chance to miss it.
But yeah, it was scary
sometimes.
If I did have a thing that I
thought or I'd considered he
would think is wrong, I knew
what was happening to me.
I knew it was going to happen
and I was always threatened.
I always thought or felt that I
had to do what he told me or
else I would get hit.
Did you ever think that he would
think of killing you?
[NODS HEAD AFFIRMATIVELY]
What did you do?
What did I do or
what did he do?
What did you do?
What did I do?
Yeah.
I always stayed thinking that--
I didn't believe he
would, but I was taken to
the hospital two times.
So it's really dumb sometimes.
You know that the threat
is there, but you
don't listen to it.
OK, Ruby, do you want
to stop it now?
Just think of more things
to talk about
and we'll do it after.
Yeah?
OK.
Hi, everybody.
We're in the car because
we couldn't
do it inside yesterday.
But the funny thing is what I
was going to tell you is that
your dad would be nice in
front of everybody.
Most of the times, he was
always happy, smiling.
Maybe it's hard for them to
picture him hitting me.
I don't know because more and
more, a lot of times they saw
bruises, and they know that
I went to the hospital two
times, so it's not like they're
ignorant to all this,
but maybe they just didn't want
to believe it and they
wanted to blame me
for how things.
On September 28, 2002, that's
the last incident, and that
was after we got
back together.
That was the first time
he touched me.
He hit me, and I couldn't
take it.
And he forced me out
of the apartment.
My son was sleeping in the
bedroom, and he wouldn't let
me back in.
And my cousins were inside.
They were, you know, obviously
very scared.
They had never seen things
like this, right?
Then one of my cousins said to
him to relax, to calm down.
Nothing was happening,
you know?
So he kicked them out of
the apartment as well.
So all five of us were outside
and he wouldn't let me come
back in the apartment.
I just begged him to let
me go in to get my son.
And I kept on putting my
leg to not let him
fully close the door.
You know, because we lived
on the eighth floor.
I figured he's too angry.
He could do anything
to the baby, right?
Things just came to my mind.
And that's what I kept
on asking him.
Just let me get the
baby outside.
Just let me take him.
And he wouldn't.
So one of the neighbors said
to me, are you OK?
Do you want to use my phone
to call the police?
And I was just in the
hallway by the
elevators of the building.
I saw him coming out
with my son in his
arms. My son was sleeping.
I said to him, I said I already
called the police.
They're on their way now.
If you want to leave, leave, but
you're not taking my son.
If you want to kill me for
this, I don't care.
And when I mentioned to him that
I had called the police,
I figured he'd relax himself
a little bit.
And yes, he did give
me my son.
From the time that I knew he was
out and that I had called
the police, I knew he
wouldn't be back.
I knew it.
And I felt relief.
Everybody, this is the person
doing my interview.
This is one of my prides.
It's not even on.
Are you sure?
[LAUGHS]
I'm scared that he's going to
take them to El Salvador.
This is one thing that he kept
on saying to me, maybe to
scare me off and to make me
scared and go back with him.
And he kept on telling me that
he was going to take my kids
and bring them to his mother
in El Salvador.
How do you feel about Mommy
and Daddy separating?
Well, I kind of feel good
because she's happy, but then
at the same time,
I miss my dad.
We don't hardly see him, because
he says that he's
always really busy and stuff.
The only thing that hurts
me is my kids.
I would do anything for them.
Sometimes I feel like going back
to him when I see them.
They miss him.
He doesn't come and see them.
And sometimes they feel
guilty for it.
I mean, I feel guilty
because, you know.
So when I tell you, like I
wanted them to grow up with
him, because he was
a good dad.
I'm not going to say--
he never abused them.
No, nothing.
He was a good father.
So I thought maybe I should
have taken it for them.
Maybe I should've just stayed,
and they wouldn't have to go
through this.
What is your message
to these kids?
What can you tell them?
Tell their parents if they
could stop fighting.
If the next day, and the next
day, and the next day, and the
next day, and the next day the
dad keeps on hurting the mom,
ask the mom to separate
and to not be scared.
And if you're still little,
I don't know.
You can't do anything.
But if you're big, you can.
But then if you try to get them
together again, you're
just wasting your time telling
your mom to get separated.
[MUSIC]
Mom, I have some questions for
you regarding your marriage
because of all the abuse you
were getting from my dad.
Can you tell me a little bit
about how you met Dad?
There's just one more thing
around these questions.
When did you and dad
start to fight?
If you were still fighting with
dad before marriage, then
why would you marry him?
Did grandpa saw when
you'd get hurt?
Oh, yeah.
Many times, Shaan.
Many times.
Did Dad ever try to get help?
When you moved from the shelter
to the apartment now
to our brand new home, what
challenges did you face
raising me and Gurjis?
My counselor is like
a family to me.
We are family now.
So it's not that I just receive
formal help, which is
as required to complete this
paperwork, that paperwork.
But in part to deal with the
loneliness and day-to-day
operations.
A lot is required.
Not everyone has that.
No.
One of the things that I find
interesting is, you see, often
within the mainstream community
the whole issue of
wife abuse is looked on purely
as if this is a cultural
phenomenon.
As if in diverse cultures
that this is the norm.
That this is what is
happening to abused
women in their culture.
So somehow in South Asian
culture and black culture and
Hispanic culture, what these men
do to these women-- and I
look at from a totally different
point of view.
These are in all cultures,
in all religions, in all
socioeconomic strata, whether
someone is well educated,
someone is not well educated.
There are individuals that
through their learned behavior
have decided to behave towards
another human being in a
particular fashion.
So how in different cultures
is violence against women
taken care of whether they
are in villages or
whether they aren't.
And my take on it was
that there is
much more family support.
There is much more support from
the brothers, from the
relatives, from even--
Even neighborhoods.
--even the neighbors because
everybody makes sure that it
is everybody's business.
Is the chicken done?
If it's burning, I'm not
going to eat it.
You need to.
One of the things which then
becomes an issue is how do
police expect our women
to call 9-1-1?
From my experience-- I can
speak only from my
experience-- I never called.
I've been through a lot of
difficult time in my life.
Not even for a single minute I
think that calling 9-1-1 is an
option for me.
Most of the women are now--
immigrant women-- are saying
is that we would like the
abuse to end and not the
marriage to end.
So perhaps they are scared that
if the police arrest my
husband, there is no chance
in hell for us to
then get back together.
So how can-- from an immigrant
woman's experience-- can the
police intervention or judicial
system help an
immigrant woman?
I think the system can provide
some more community-based,
culturally appropriate service
in their own community, which
is available to women when
women need help.
That's what I see.
It's not the question of a
service between 8:30 to 4:30.
[INTERPOSING   VOICES]
Even born here, guys I went to
high school with, that I've
known since kindergarten, they
want their wives to stay at
home, cook and clean, all
that kind of stuff.
I think they have sometimes even
a worse mentality than
people who were born
elsewhere.
Or they want to go to India
because they know they can
take advantage of their wives.
So they're like, oh, women over
here, they'll just dial
9-1-1, but the ones in India,
those women won't say
anything, so.
During your separation
with Dad, were you
ever feeling lonely?
As a single mother,
you came so far.
Me and Shaan are very happy.
Proud of you.
I'm sure you're proud
of yourself as well.
Thank you, Gurjis.
I feel the same.
I'm very proud of both of
you and proud of myself.
[LAUGHTER]
Ramayana is an epic play based
on our Lord Rama's life, which
we play every year in
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
Temple.
I direct it and also
I act in it.
Today I'm going to play
the role of Rama,
who was a demon king.
Rama made one mistake and one
mistake, just one mistake was
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
of life.
So it's very crucial,
you know.
We don't just think
it's one mistake.
We have to take the consequences
of the mistake.
This documentary is about the
abuse of women and children
and since you, me and Mom have
all been through it, I was
thinking we could
talk about it.
Sure.
Go ahead.
OK.
Why did you regret
the situation?
Why do you regret hitting your
wife and everything?
Well, first of all,
I never hit her.
Oh, sorry.
Pushed her.
Yeah.
OK.
So do you regret it because
you love her or why
do you regret it?
No.
I do love her.
I still love her.
But can I say something?
Yeah, sure.
Go ahead.
Sometimes she feels you don't.
And she cries because she thinks
you-- at the time you
couldn't express anything
and she--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
At that time, I was by myself.
Try to understand this thing.
What happened in 1998,
I had a car accident.
A really bad one.
I had a very good job.
Life was going in very
good direction.
We were all happy.
In that accident, I hurt
myself really bad.
Today when I think about that,
I thank God that I'm still
alive and walking.
I broke my leg.
I broke my arm, all my ribs.
I had a head injury.
All my injuries you
can talk about.
And on top of that I had
a financial injury.
We had to sell our house
because of this.
You were not there.
You had a spinal injury and
the doctor said it was a
miracle that you are not
in a wheelchair.
Yeah.
I just isolated myself
so much.
At that stage, it was only
me and my bottle.
And in your journey of
depression, or whatever you
call it, was there anybody
to help you?
And if so, how?
And if not--
At that time, no one
would help me.
Did anyone try to help you?
Yeah.
I think for sure you
guys tried it.
We did.
We really did.
But it was not enough
help for me.
But what I don't understand is
if we couldn't give you the
proper help, then why didn't
you just ask us if there's
things we could do for you?
Because we were trying to be as
supportive as we could, and
there was a point that we
couldn't take it either.
Are you scared?
I was.
When?
At the time when you were going
through the depression
and the only thing that seemed
to help you was alcohol and
[UNINTELLIGIBLE PHRASE].
I'm all right now.
Oh, I'm not saying you now.
I'm talking about in the past.
Honey, listen.
At that time I was
scared of myself.
But honestly, the guy
when he turns into
the Hulk, it's scary.
And everyone's scared of the
Hulk and then when he finally
turns back, everybody's
grateful.
My wife, my daughter,
they used to ask
me any simple question.
Would you like to
eat something?
drink something?
Just leave me alone.
All day, I'm just lying on the
bed, maybe watching TV for a
couple of minutes, reading for
a couple of minutes, then
again going back to my
negative thoughts.
I tried to commit suicide.
I actually know about that.
And it didn't happen
just once.
I tried it two times when
I was so depressed.
Once with sleeping pills
and the other time, I
think, I do not know.
Both times was not with
sleeping pills.
Yeah.
Antidepressants.
Yeah, you tried to put all
of them in your mouth.
I grabbed them out of
your mouth because
I didn't want that.
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
And you bit my finger that day.
That hurt.
Ouch.
Sorry.
So one day arguments became so
severe I said, you know what?
To hell with it.
I just want to leave
the house.
I wanted to go out and my wife
wouldn't let me go out, so I
pushed her.
So later I heard a knock
on the door.
But I didn't get up.
There was a second knock.
I didn't bother.
Third knock.
So eventually, I went to check
the door, and there were cops.
They told me that my wife
pressed charges
against me for assault.
So I told them, assault?
What do you mean by assault?
I pushed her.
They told me in Canadian
law, that's assault.
When we did put you in
jail, we just needed
time away from you.
We didn't want you
to go to jail.
Can I come in?
No!
[UNINTELLIGIBLE],
the person is here.
Sorry about the interruption,
everybody.
We didn't want to hurt you.
We just wanted some
time alone.
But when they told us that you
were supposed to be in jail
for 11 days, we didn't
want to.
We tried to negotiate.
We tried to negotiate really
hard, trust me.
And when I found out that you
got handcuffed, I was really
hurt, because you're not a
criminal and you're not a bad
man, but when alcohol goes
through you, you're not only
mean to everybody, it's venom.
But I didn't get it until I
met the [UNINTELLIGIBLE].
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
really did.
We got the good side back.
The main thing I learned
from him is I had to
accept what I did.
I can't deny it.
I should not deny it.
It's not I can't.
I can.
It's easy to deny anything.
But I should not.
We came apart.
But we still attempt to focus on
this thing, you know what?
I'm the breadwinner, and
she's the homemaker.
But on the contrary, she's also
a part of breadwinning.
People forget that.
And when there is a clash
of ego, things
start to follow apart.
And that's what's happening.
Why men get physical, it's
either my way or my way.
If I don't get my way,
I get angry.
I'm not just talking
about myself.
I'm talking about the common
man's perspective.
If I don't get my way,
so I get mad.
When I get mad, I
lose my control.
When I lose my control,
there's a violence.
And in the whole-- this episode,
who's suffering most?
Kids.
They see, they do.
What else do you want to say?
What I'd like to talk today is
from the bottom of my heart.
The way I feel right now, I
don't want to say too much.
All I will say, east or west,
family's the best. Ah!
That's very sweet.
Thank you for all your time.
And I love my daughter!
Shall I sing?
No.
Come on.
You'll love it.
[SINGS]
OK.
I'm turning it off.
I do feel good having
Mom and Dad home.
It's better.
And I learned I can't always
rely on my parents.
I have to be a little
more independent.
[MUSIC]
I'm really happy that this is
being filmed here in my church
because the event that led to
my ex husband's eventual
conviction actually started off
on Mother's Day after mass
at St. Joseph's.
We planned that we were going to
make this African feast. So
I went upstairs with my card,
and by the time we came down,
we're playing African music,
and chopping up okra, and
teaching them how to make
soup and stuff.
Everybody was happy.
The next thing I hear,
the music dies.
I go into the family room and
he started at me about, you
think you're a man.
You think you've got balls.
You're using the children
to do your dirty work.
He yanks all the cords from
the PlayStation where the
music was coming from.
And said to me, if you think
you've got balls, come
plug it back in.
So as I bent over to plug
the cord back into the
PlayStation, I felt this fist on
the side of my head, which
I think the only sensation I can
relate it to, if you watch
cartoons, and you see some--
when they punch you and you
lift off the ground, I lifted
and fell onto the couch, face
down on the couch.
And he jumped on top of
me, straddled me.
He had one hand on the back of
my head and the other one in
the back of my-- the back of my
neck and on the back of my
head, and he was suffocating
me in the couch.
I could hear the screaming
from afar.
He's screaming, I'm
going to kill you.
You're going to die tonight.
I'm going to kill you.
I was punched.
I was kicked by him.
My eldest, who was 15 at the
time, would jump in front of
him when he'd go to hit.
She saved my life that day
because if it had not been for
her pulling him off and getting
in front of me, he
would have done it.
He would have killed me because
that was what he
intended to do.
As a result of that incident on
Mother's Day, you saved me.
Literally, you saved my life.
I'm really uncomfortable.
No.
No, listen.
Leave it running.
Please don't do that.
Please don't.
Leave it running.
And at one point, he told her
that if she interferes again,
he's going to crack her skull.
But it didn't stop her, because
every time he came at
me, she would jump
in front of him.
I don't know why you feel
uncomfortable with it.
I'm honoring you.
I want you to stop
it right now.
I'm honoring you.
I'm going to stop it.
OK.
Stop it.
Mom, I don't like--
My eldest daughter did an
interview with me and it moved
me in ways that I didn't
think I would be moved.
If you feel someone's done
something bad to you, me,
personally, I'm not going
to just stick around.
If my hand's on a hot iron,
I'm not going to leave it
there because I know I'm
going to get a scar.
It isn't as clear-cut as putting
your hand on a hot
iron, getting burnt, and
instinctively removing it.
Every instinct is to defend
yourself and to get away from
harm's way.
But understanding the psychology
of abuse and the
abuser, it's about layers.
It takes years of gradual
wearing down somebody to such
a stage you don't even recognize
the difference
between your hand
and the iron.
I thought that when you
love somebody, right?
When you love someone, that
you are to forgive them.
When you love somebody,
love is all consuming.
It would help him.
If I showed him that even with
all the weaknesses that he was
demonstrating, even with all the
physical assaults, if he
could understand that I loved
him no matter what, then he
would know that I was a good
person, and he would somehow
love me back.
If you say that this has
happened to you again and
again and again, I just don't
understand exactly why you
would stay.
I think that's why-- that's
where my idea of you being
weak comes from.
I guess that is a sign
of weakness.
She's angry at me and
I recognize that.
She's angry at her dad.
Apart from all the teenage angst
that a 17-year-old, has,
but to complicate their lives
with this degree of hostility.
I wasn't angry at you.
I guess, just disappointed,
I don't know.
Disappointed how?
Well, if I'm in a situation
where I'm-- what's happening
to me I'm not comfortable with,
I wouldn't just stay
there and not do anything
about it.
So you believe that I
stayed and didn't do
anything about it?
Well, look, that's
not believe.
That's just a fact.
When she was asking me the
questions and I realized that
if I didn't work on myself, then
I would be failing not
just her and her sister, but
myself and other women.
So part of me working on myself
is to be honest with
her, is to be honest
with myself.
Part of me helping my
kids-- oh, sorry.
Just hold on one second.
I said I wasn't going to cry.
The justice system needs
a lot of work.
He was given 60 days house
arrest, effectively.
For what he did, 60 days.
My son for three months was
wetting the bed, three months
after this happened.
Do you worry about becoming
violent as a result of what
you experienced?
In the beginning, I guess I
worried a lot because I had a
lot of emotions.
I had a lot of emotions.
I didn't know how to
decipher them.
And actually, I was a little
bit worried about becoming
like him, but then when I
would get irritated more
easily [UNINTELLIGIBLE PHRASE],
I'd worry that I was
becoming angrier.
Do you think your brother
will beat up women?
No.
Why not?
Because he has lots of girls
in the house already.
He has lots of girls
in the house.
He has lots and lots of
girls in the house.
So no, he's not beating
up any woman.
Plus he's always cuddled,
isn't he?
Yeah.
And we tell him we love
him, don't we?
Mom?
Mm-hm?
But Dad wasn't actually just
beating you up all
the time, was he?
Actually, he beat me up
a lot of the time.
All the time?
It wasn't every day.
He wouldn't come home every
day and pow-pow-pow.
But he beat me up a
lot of the time.
For years, I was silent.
For years, I kept his secret.
For years, everybody who knew
us saw this perfect family:
affluent, intelligent,
articulate, bright children,
wonderful husband.
Mom, how do you think
Dad feels?
How do you think that Dad feels
about you hitting him?
About me hitting him?
What you did to him in this
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]?
Well, I didn't attack him.
The time's I scratched him,
I was trying to defend--
To get him off of you?
That's right.
I was trying to defend myself.
I don't fight him.
I didn't fight him that day.
And I think he knows that,
but what he says
is something else.
I'm disappointed that we're
here today, right?
This isn't the life that I
had wanted for myself.
This isn't the relationship
that I had wanted.
And it isn't about
fairy tales.
It really isn't.
I just wanted to be happy.
Mom, if you were the Government,
would you change
that thing about men
beating up women?
If I was the Government?
Yeah, the president of
this whole country.
The prime minister.
Yeah, prime minister.
Well, yes.
You know this women's institute
that I'm running,
well, that's what we're trying
to do is to talk to the
Government, and talk to women,
and talk to the police, and
talk to lawyers, so that
everybody works together to
help stop violence against
women, right?
Because it affects
everybody, right?
Yeah.
Were you affected when
I was beaten up?
Well, actually, I was actually
quite scared.
I know, my darling.
You were very, very scared.
But you were very brave,
as well, right?
Mm-hm.
I had already received an
undergraduate degree in law
from University College
Cardiff.
And when the divorce proceedings
started, I decided
to enroll here at Osgoode Hall
to do my masters in law, and
that was one of the best
decisions I made because it
brought me back into the legal
profession in a way that I've
been able to utilize in the
work that I'm doing now.
Even you as a seven year
old, almost eight,
you know your rights.
And when somebody's doing
something that's wrong, what
do you say to them?
That ain't right?
That ain't right.
That's a good thing
to say to them.
You tell them that's wrong.
And then you go-- are
you listening?
Yeah.
And then you go and you tell
the authorities and the
authorities are the police.
But sometimes police
don't listen.
They usually listen to men.
Who told you that?
Well, I know that for a fact.
You know that for a fact?
These are human rights
violations that's happening to
us as women and it's happening
to our children.
When we talk about what
practical things that the law
can do, well, for starters it
can marry-- excuse the pun--
it can marry the Criminal Courts
with the Family Law,
because that way, you get to
hear the totality of the life
of the woman.
When you separate it and one
court doesn't know what the
other is doing, the woman
is the one that becomes
revictimized, and it is to the
advantage of her abuser.
From the day, Mother's Day, May
11, 2003, when I sat at 42
Division and explained what my
ex-husband had done to me that
day, since that day, I haven't
stopped talking.
And I can't.
And I won't.
[MUSIC]